Good afternoon everyone.
Good afternoon. Hello. Hello. Well, welcome.
Unfortunately, we're nicely on time today
because we are, um, we're always dependent on when question
type finishes, so let's thank you
for your patience anyway, right now.
Um, you can take, now what we'll do is just,
and for the sake of those other submitters in the room,
we'll just, uh, introduce ourselves.
I'm Greg O'Connor, the chairman of the, um, committee.
I'm Greg Fleming, the deputy chair
and the MP for Mongo, Kiki, et
Cetera. I'm committee
permanent member Paul Garcia, uh,
national MP for newly
And Chapman.
And online we have, uh, Francisco Hernandez, um,
who will be joining us, questions if necessary.
Yeah. Oh, he's there.
F Francisco Hernandez.
I'm, uh, one of the Green mps
and I'm subbing in for Ka Carter,
who is the permanent member of this committee.
Alright, now we've got you for 10 minutes.
Um, now, Ms. Chapman? Yes. Ms. Chapman?
Yes. You can call me Anna Anne. Okay, thank you Ann.
Um, and we have you and
I have some friends who are here supporting me.
Very good. Well, you're welcome. In
Case I get too nervous, If you like.
And we'll, so Tim, take your submissions as read, um,
but speak to the highlights
and hopefully leave time for questions. Welcome.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak.
And my petition follows many letters, articles,
and submissions that I've written on the subject
of Section 10 of the Heart Act,
which have been unsuccessful.
Amending Section 10 is simply not
a priority for the government.
Uh, and I understand that and making submissions.
And finally, this petitions,
I make no judgment on any person
or organization, which has been part of the process.
Fertility Associates have done, um, all they could
to assist me and I thank them for that.
While my petition relates to the experience of my grandson
who got leukemia when he was 16, it is not about him
and not receiving the first advisory letter from Fertility
Associates advising that his 10 year storage was up,
he suddenly found himself in the position
that he was in danger of never being able to have children
of his own at a time of his own.
Interesting. His application for an extension was declined,
which added to the stress.
And it made me also wonder why the power to decline
or accept, uh, applications for extensions rest in the hands
of anonymous body rather than politic politicians
that a group of people should have the power
to decide whether
or not a young person should have children is to me
and the concept of natural justice,
it's too late for my grandson.
So my position is for those families
who do not have the financial resources to employ a lawyer
to pay for a courier
and for storage in Australia, which is what we had to do,
that is what my family had to do.
And it was at some cost to us
and it was to preserve our grandson's.
Right. To have a child at his time of his own choosing.
So my petition is for those families
who do not have an old trooper like me able to write
to advocate and who has some knowledge
of the system of governance.
So my petition is essentially
about natural justice and human rights.
Simply put Section 10
of the Heart Act does not meet the needs of young people
today who have had cancer.
Alright, well look, thank you very much.
Could, could I just ask a question?
He was notified or,
or who he was notified that the, um,
time was up too late.
Is that correct? Well,
He moved house in the first letter advising him
that he needed to apply for an extension to be able
for fertility associates to be able to continue
storing his semen.
Didn't get to him. Alright,
so the second letter he did receive
and that told him your time's up. Alright.
Did the first letter, obviously that was an advisory,
It was an advisory letter.
As I understand it, we still have not seen it.
Well, if that were to be fixed, that the
advisory letter had to be, um, what used
to be the old registered mail.
Yeah. Um, I'm not sure what the modern equivalent is,
but the onus was on the, uh, the,
the organization holding the sample to ensure
that the notification was delivered.
That would be helpful. Would
That, would that be helpful As well?
That would be helpful, but I think, um, more
and more people, more and more young people are getting
cancer and, you know, it worries me that,
that they don't have the mental,
physical financial resources to do, to do what I've done.
And if I can just ask one other question,
do you think there should be any time limit it?
No, I don't think there should be a time limit it.
Well, I can see the logic in having a time limit if you
store your sea, if you get sick
and you need to store your semen
when you were in your thirties.
Yes. I mean, there is some logic in having a timeline,
but then, but 16
and 26, you're barely starting a life.
You're barely getting into the business of having
a long-term relationship.
Kids these days are having children later. And
And from your knowledge of the system, would he likely
to have been allowed to continue
to store the sample? Had he,
Had he asked for, For had
He got the first letter? Yes.
Uh, your understanding is
that the criteria that exists? He would've
I been, I I think that's, I think that's right.
You can apply for an extension and it is granted.
And how long is that extension for? We may be able to get
That. That's right. Don't,
I'm sorry.
So, so we, we may be able to get,
we have some other submitters
who'll be able to fill in that.
Yeah. So look, I'm sorry that don, these, these,
as I read your
submission, these are the ones that came to me.
Yeah. As the chair, I suppose I've got the,
the, um, the privilege.
You've been able to ask those questions.
But, um, other members, do you have questions?
I, I do. Yes. Yeah. Hello.
Um, thank you so much for both your written
and your oral submission today.
Thank you for taking this cause up.
I'm really looking forward to, um, digging into the detail
of why the legislation operates where it is.
So echoing all of, uh, the cheers questions,
just, um, two for me.
One, just, um, picking up on that question
around should there be a time limit, would you suggest
that maybe they seem be destroyed when the
person dies themselves?
Absolutely. Right. Yes. But that, so that,
that would be your recommendation at that point?
Yes. I hadn't even thought about that. Okay. I,
Yeah, I, I mean, I'm a grandmother.
I'm nearly 80 and I didn't, don't think
of my grandchild dying.
So that never came into my, um, my thought process at all.
Yeah. But I think there was some logic in destroying, um,
samples, any samples
unless that person specifically asked for it
to be continue to be stowed. Stowed. Okay, cool.
One of the arguments that, um, counter arguments may be
that were, that, um, sample then to be used
down the track that there could be issues of liability,
financial liability for the individual.
So there's, it does open up, but,
but I guess your answer would be, well they,
they're gonna be there at any stage, um, anyway, so
any perhaps comment on that?
No, I don't have any thoughts about that. I'm sorry,
Members, any further questions? I just,
And sorry if this wasn't clear.
So, so you,
because of the resources of your family, you were able to,
to store his semen in Australia? Is that, what is that
In Australia. Okay. So
We had to get, um, yeah, a courier. Okay.
And, and the cost of the fair
and five years storage in Australia,
and then the cost of the fare of the courier back.
So it is a substantial
Amount. Okay. So it's back in
New Zealand now?
No, it's in Australia. It's in Australia
for five years, at which point you need to renew.
And so you are, what you are hoping is that our legislation,
our regime has changed by that stage
that when it comes back then
I was hoping by then I might have a great grandchild.
What's, um, from your knowledge,
and again, we might be able
to get some assistance data on in Australia,
so it's a five year threshold.
What's gonna happen after five years?
There was a five year, um, choice
that my son made to pay for storage.
Right. I don't know if there is a threshold there or not.
Well, that, that's something we may be able to,
from the nods, we may be able to get
that knowledge from somebody else.
Submitters. Well, look, I think it's quite clear, um,
things it submission saying for your work.
And, uh, this is one thing about our petitions committee,
you know, we get, um, matters come
before us that, uh, there is nowhere else to take them.
And as a result, I like
to think we've become very well informed
about some of these issues. So thank you.
So can I ask what happens now?
Well, we are going to hear now from, um, organizations,
associated organizations, um, with,
and then, then we will then repair, prepare a report,
the recommendation, um, back to parliament
and you'll get a copy of that report.
That'll be a public available report.
So our job really now is to hear from
Every everybody else
From as many people as we can to improve the quality of,
of our recommendations.
Yep. And So can you recommend, um,
a change the legislation?
Mm. Is that part of
We can't change it. No,
No. I know. Can't change it. But
can you recommend a change?
We can recommend the government then now instigate,
um, the, the the process.
The process, the relevant ministry. Yeah.
And minister then can, um, undertake to do this,
um, to do, to do work on this.
We, we are not, um, we like to think we're quite powerful
as a petition committee, but we can't actually unfortunately
instigate the, the, um, the uh, um,
legislation directly from here.
But good question. Very good question.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Every, every, every grandson should have a, uh,
grand grandmother
right now.
Uh, we're gonna hear from advisory committee on assisted
reproduction technology,
and we're getting, they're coming in via Zoom.
I understand Deborah Wilson.
We have,
Can you hear me?
We, we have, we hear you. And
Uh, there we go. We can,
Uh, thank you Deborah. Uh,
Good afternoon everyone. Um, so
my name is Debra Wilson.
I'm the new chair
of the Advisory Comm Committee on Assisted Reproduction, um,
taking over the role in, um, end of December of last year.
Prior to that, I was a member of a, a for, for three years
as the legal expert.
Um, I'm also a professor
of medical law at the University of Canterbury.
Alright, look. Well, thank you.
So, um, did you hear, you've heard the previous submitters?
Yes, I, um, yes. The previous submitter I heard, yes. Oh,
Good. So, um, now
we have, we've read your submission,
but we're looking forward to hearing from you and 10 minutes
and hopefully leave time for questions.
Oh, I'll try my best. Um, I just wanna start
by acknowledging the young man
and the family in this situation, um, to go
through the cancer treatment and survive it
and then to be hit with this kind of situation.
Um, I don't have the words. It's, it's, it's horrible.
Um, when this came
before a a TI just remember the feeling in the room being
that we really wanted
to help if there was any way that we possibly could.
And we saw the, the sort of unfairness of the situation
and how what was happening was sort of contrary
to the PR purposes and principles of the HEART Act.
And we really wanted to find a way to tell ECAT
that they could hear this application and,
and see where it goes.
Um, so we spent a lot of time and effort
and a lot of nights trying to brainstorm to see
how this application could be heard by Kart.
But we ended up realizing that actually we,
we simply couldn't, um, that
because the, the tenure year limit is
so fixed in the Heart Act, AART doesn't have jurisdiction
to give kart any advice or guidance, and
therefore Kart just simply could not get the application.
And we, we couldn't find a way around that.
Um, so the, the only thing that,
that Aart could actually do is perform it other function,
which is to provide advice to the Minister of Health as
to possible changes, um, to the HEART Act.
And so that's what we did.
Um, in May of last year, we, we
provided advice, um, suggesting an amendment to the act,
which would allow for late applications to be heard
by kart in, in certain situations.
And we gave some examples of when that,
that might be appropriate.
And we told the minister that we would, um,
follow this quite quick advice up with some more, um,
detailed supplementary advice when we had the time
to really debate and, and see where that could go.
Um, this supplementary advice is
just in its final drafting process at the moment,
and we intend that to go to the Minister, um,
within the next week or so.
Um, and the other thing that,
that we've been doing is in September of last year, um, ACOT
and ECOT presented a joint submission on the improving
arrangements for Surrogacy bill.
And we realized that that Bill had a couple of, um,
minor changes to the Heart Act snuck in
that weren't quite surrogacy related.
And so we thought we would take the opportunity
and our submission on that, um, to, to repeat, um,
that maybe when the surrogacy bill is going forward, um,
we could also sneak in some amendments to Section 10
of the Heart Act because egg, egg
and embryo freezing is a little bit related to surrogacy.
Um, so we are aware of the issue
and we are looking for ways that,
that we can address it in the most appropriate way.
Um, so that's kind of an overview.
I'm happy to answer any questions
that you have about our work.
Alright, members? No, that's very answer. Yep. Um, Mr.
Chair? Yes. Yes.
Um, Deborah, what is the science base,
um, of the length of time, uh,
why is it prescribed at, at tap
At the 10 year mark?
Okay, this is, now I'm talking as,
as an academic who's done research into this.
Um, if you trace it back,
the 10 years came in in our 2004 act, right.
Which we borrowed from the UK Human Fertilization
and Embryology Act.
And they got that from the 1984 Warnock report. Right?
So it was a very long time ago, 40 years ago
that they picked the 10 year period.
Um, several reasons. First was the, in 1984,
they weren't sure about the science, so they didn't know
how long you could free sperm
and then defrost it and have it work.
So they said, well, 10 years,
and then we'll see how the science develops.
The science has developed very well since then
and now we're, we are looking at 50 or 60 years
and the, the sperm or eggs are still very viable.
Um, another reason was that they wanted to ensure,
um, that people just check in that you don't store material
and leave it there forever because things change.
Um, they wanted to avoid the situation where
maybe relationship breakups might happen,
and then later on someone wants to,
to use it and there's a conflict.
One party wants, wants to use, the other party does not.
So having a renewal process every 10 years would make sure
that no events like that have happened
and would also, um, require people to just
rethink their plans every 10 years.
Um, there was a concern that you don't want families
with kids that are 20, 30 years difference in age.
So it was really just a way of
making sure there was a check-in policy every 10 years.
Um, and also certainty for clinics.
Um, while sperm is obviously not very big in itself,
the storage containers are actually quite
big and they cost money.
Um, and so there, there was a concern
that if people just stored and left them there forever, um,
the people would, um, they would run outta space.
So those were the reasons, um, they, they,
the scientific basis is, is not relevant anymore.
Um, the need to keep checking in
and making sure that people still want to keep them,
um, is still valid.
But other countries like the United Kingdom have now
addressed that in different ways
than requiring a fresh application every 10 years.
Right. Thank you Deborah.
And, and your view is that, you know,
you gave a good exhaustive list there of rationale.
Do you believe that any
or all of those rationale are still pertinent?
Um, I think it's important
that you don't just freeze forever.
That there is some point where, um,
if I've got my eggs frozen, that I sit down
and say, do I still want them frozen?
Do I intend to use them?
I think there's a, there's validity in that
because they are potential life
and there should be a level of, of respect there.
Um, but I'm not sure it's necessary to go
through an application process.
So the United Kingdom,
which we borrowed their original model of 10 years,
and then you can reapply, um, in the last couple
of years they've gone to, um, almost open-ended.
You can store for up to 55 years,
but every 10 years you just have to re-consent.
Oh, okay. So that, that does the,
the thinking about it getting in touch
with the fertility clinic,
but having it as a consent rather than an application kind
of addresses the situation where if a late application
occurs and you're, you're in trouble.
Right. The consent can can happen a bit
later and it would still be okay.
So I do think it's important that we keep checking in,
but not linked to an application.
Alright. And in your experience, a case like,
um, Mr.
Chapman's, um, grandson, it sounds like it'd be a no brainer
to grant an extension in that situation.
Am I, it would no brainer.
It's not a very good medical technical term. Yeah.
But, um, it would probably fulfill the criteria,
um, quite easily.
I think it would've fulfilled the criteria. Yeah.
Alright. And that, it sounds like you're accepting
that it's not a bad idea to have some sort of a threshold,
even if it's as little as a check in
and advising, asking people that,
is this still relevant? Do you,
Do you think? I think so. I think
it's always a good idea. Yeah.
And just, can I just ask,
and this is not something, what's the cost
of storage is always born by the donor, is that right
by the family or the,
Um, in the full cost in this particular case.
So the case of a minor who's storing,
because they're going through chemotherapy
that is government funded.
So the first 10 years will often be funded
by the government.
And that's also, um, why I think this case kind
of got into a little bit of the issue that it had.
Um, if someone is storing
because they're going through IVF treatment
or something at the moment, then they pay themselves
and every year they get a bill, which is kind of a reminder.
You've gotta pay, and by the way, you've only got
so many years left,
but for a case with a minor where it's sort
of government funded for the first 10 years, you can kind
of lose track of them a little bit
because they're not having to pay,
they're not having to check in every year.
And so that might have contributed
to what happened a little bit.
Who pays which,
which department, which
vote would that come from? Do you know?
I'm not sure. Ministry of Health, again,
that might be a question that, um,
we've got some more submit.
It sounds like you've got good,
you've got some good question to answer here,
so I'll save us asking them.
Thanks. Yeah. Alright.
Well look, sorry members, anyone No further questions.
Very helpful, thank you. Um, thank you.
This is a, a topic that, um, as, as parliamentarians,
we enjoy the opportunity to be learning
what we're learning on topics like this.
So thank you very much and hopefully we can help.
So thank you.
And we now have, um, you're welcome to remain online,
of course, family associates for, sorry,
fertility Associates who again, are coming in via Zoom.
Right. Good afternoon.
Good afternoon. Um, and we have, uh, Suzanne Chuan
and obviously one other.
Yeah. So, um, yeah, so my name is, uh, Alex Price.
I'm the Chief Executive of Fertility Associates.
Um, so thank you for the invitation
to make a verbal submission.
Uh, so just, uh, I'll give a sort of a brief overview, uh,
for about five minutes and then, uh, invite questions.
So just by way of background, uh,
fertility Associates started in 1987.
Uh, we've close to 40 years offering IVF
and other fertility treatment to Kiwis.
Uh, we operate from six IVF clinics across the country.
So Auckland, Hamilton, Taronga, uh, Wellington,
Christchurch, and Dunedin.
Uh, and we also have fi uh,
five clinics in Malaysia, one clinic in Thailand.
Uh, so to give you an idea, around 5,000 patients, uh,
will start IVF treatment with us, uh, this year.
So here in New Zealand we provide about 75%, uh,
of all the IVF treatment in the country.
Uh, and at this point in time, we have about 14,000 patients
who have treatment and, uh,
have samples and storage with us.
So, uh, in terms of my background as the chief executive,
so, uh, my original training was in chemical engineering,
uh, but I have completed a postgraduate
certificate in reproductive medicine.
Uh, and I've been with FIA Fertility
Associates for close to 20 years.
Uh, I also served on the board of the Fertility Society
of Australia, uh, and New Zealand,
and that, that represents those of us working in the sector.
So I do have some knowledge of the situation in Australia.
Um, I just wanted to make a couple of points, um, in terms
of the submission, some of the comments, so IVF was sort
of originally developed, um, in 1978 to help,
uh, with infertility.
So the idea is that we'd perform an IVF cycle, uh,
replace an embryo,
and ideally that would lead to a live birth.
But fertility treatment is actually expanded,
uh, since that time.
So of course we treat infertility,
that's the main work we do.
Uh, but we also pro, uh, assist in the treatment
of genetic conditions, uh,
through pre-implantation genetic diagnosis, uh,
social infertility, which is about assisting, uh,
providing reproductive options for members of the, uh,
rainbow community.
Uh, and of course the main focus we're talking about today,
which is fertility preservation.
Um, so this is about the freezing of eggs
or sperm, uh, for people who are going
to have treatment usually, uh, oncology treatment,
which will compromise their reproductive potential.
So before having oncology treatment,
we can freeze their eggs or sperm, uh,
and, uh, those patients can return to us later on
and, uh, have, uh, fertility treatment.
So, and I think that's actually become an
increasing area of work for us.
Uh, and there's a couple of reasons, reasons for that.
So one is there's much more awareness of, uh,
the availability, fertility preservation.
Now, uh, and also, and this is actually really good news.
The survival rates, uh, for children
and teenagers from cancer has actually
also improved substantially.
So we have more awareness, uh,
and more patients, uh, able to have that option in future.
So if you look at that expansion in fertility treatment
and the number of patients we can, we treat, uh, you can see
that we've had a significant increase, uh,
in the volume of stored material
since the heart attack was first
put into place over 20 years ago.
So, you know, and that's kind of represented as I say,
in those 14,000 patients that we have, uh, with
that have material stored
with us at the moment in New Zealand.
So, you know, we aren't opposed
to revisions of a heart act,
but our submission was very much saying that we have
to be quite careful, uh, in this space.
We do actually believe that clear legislation
with timeframes is actually really important.
Um, and that's basically around the interest
of the potential child patients themselves
and actually something that's workable for clinics.
Uh, and we don't actually think that an open-ended
flexible period is workable.
And I think the concept is something that, uh, clearly
many people, uh, do struggle with.
You know, how long is too long?
You know, one of the things we do consider
with a potential child is I think most people would like
to think that, uh, a potential child
will know their own parents so that the,
a child will not lose a parent before they reach adulthood.
So the question you then have to ask yourselves is
how old is too old for fertility treatment
and how old is too long for material to be stored for?
And pretty much the consensus in the sector at the moment in
many of these countries is this idea of a check in point,
uh, at least once every 10 years.
And in some countries it's five years, just so
that people really think about, you know, what am I going
to do with my material, with my stored samples?
So we, we do believe
that these fixed time periods are quite important.
Um, I think one of the other things to bear in mind is
that eCard itself rarely actually, uh,
declines applications.
So as long as we make an application
before the 10 years, eCard actually normally answer.
And I would, I cannot actually think of a case
where they have declined, uh,
an oncology related application.
So, uh, you know, our view is that, uh,
the 10 year limit, uh, is important.
Uh, but it is, uh, you know, an expanding issue with more,
uh, frozen material and storage.
And, uh, I think it's great.
The petition has actually drawn attention to the issue.
Um, but specifically if the Ministry of Health, which is
where the funding of, uh, storage
and material can assist with storage funding beyond
that 10 year period, uh, we should be able to, you know,
find a solution to this problem within the legislation.
Thank you. Um, thank you.
Um, members questions?
Um, I, I have a question.
So you, you've got 75% of the, of, of
the market, as I say, so you are,
so there's other organizations that are storing in, in the,
doing the same thing as yourselves?
Yeah. So there's two,
two other clinics in Auckland Fertility Plus,
which is the ADA owned or, uh, owned unit in Green Lane
and Reprimand, which is another private clinic.
Um, and so with, uh, you are under obligation
by law to do the notification that the 10 year, um,
and the case that's given rise to today,
given there was a letter sent, um,
and you had fulfilled your legal
obligations by sending the letter.
So, so our obligation, well, the obligation actually sits
with the patient to make the application.
Uh, and one of the changes that's been worked
through at the moment to actually make this process much
easier is for clinics to apply on behalf.
But I think you, you also have to remember that, uh,
patients have ownership or guardianship
or, you know, primary sort of control over what they want
to do with their reproductive material.
It's a difficult situation if you start saying that
clinics are allowed to make application
and store material for longer.
If a patient may not, may not actually be aware of that.
If a patient dies, for example,
how would, how would, you know?
Uh, well, we do, uh, monitor, um,
you know, death notices and things of that nature, uh,
and we are often contacted by people if they know that they,
uh, you know, some relation
of theirs has had fertility treatment and,
and has material stored with us.
Right. So I'm just So under re by regulation,
what are you obliged to do?
Uh, well, if, if we get to the 10 years, if we get
to the 10 years and there is no, uh,
basically approval by ECAT to extend
beyond the 10 years by right.
We have to throw the material out
and there's basically a six month grace period to get
that discard done.
Uh, but we can't use it within that six month period.
We just have to go through the process
of discarding in the laboratory.
If the regulations would change that you, you had
to make reasonable attempts
to locate the individual.
And you're aware of this case where the notification,
first notification wasn't received
because the individual was living in a different address,
and the second, by the time the notification
was received, it was too late.
What, is there putting some onus
or regulatory onus on the Storer?
Any comment on that?
Uh, I think, you know, uh,
I mean unfortunately there is a practical reality here.
Um, so, uh, in, uh, you know,
2014, uh, art Act was amended, um,
to make very clear what the 10 year limit was, uh, which
of course fell in 2024.
And, you know, we try
and contact people by the last avail available email,
and the point was made by the previous submitter about
patients getting, uh, you know, a bill every year,
which allows us to keep in contact with them.
Yeah. But you know, we have email addresses, we have,
we send out registered mail as our final sort of step.
Uh, but I think, you know, we,
you know, we're not the CIA, we can't sort
of hunt the whole country for people.
Um, there are, I think at the moment,
a million New Zealanders living outside New Zealand.
Um, I think, you know, we go to best efforts,
but I'm not sure we can be asked to do any more than that.
Well, what if they stop paying the bill?
What happens then? Yeah, five years in arrears.
Yeah. So if a patient stops paying the bill, then
as part of the original consent, we do have the ability
to discard the material.
Okay. Uh, and you know, many patients
actually don't want to make a conscious decision to discard
because there's so much, uh, not just financial,
but emotional investment in creating those embryos.
So they basically just stop paying the bill.
Uh, and when we contact them, they often say, well,
I thought you just discarded those embryos.
So this really is mostly gonna be an issue
for the case we've got
before us today, where the government,
which department is paying the bill for where it's, um,
situations like the one we're dealing with today?
Yeah. So what happens is we have a contract, uh,
with Toda Aura.
There are four regional contracts across the country.
So Auckland, Waikato, Wellington, and South Island.
Uh, and to Aura in each region, we have a contract
for fertility treatment
and that includes the storage, uh,
of publicly funded patients and,
and includes these onco, uh, oncology patients as well.
Alright. Hi Caleb. Very useful.
And, uh, members, any other, no other clarification.
Thank you. Well, thank you very much, um, Alex, that was,
uh, fascinating, uh, to, to understand that.
So, um, thank you for your time.
Okay. Thank you very much for that. Thank you.
Now we have the ministry here,
ministry of Health or Ministry of Health,
and we have Ministry of Justice.
Would it be useful to actually
perhaps you both come to the table together?
Um, I think so. 'cause our questions gonna be the same.
Yeah, we the same. We can, Mr. Chairman can use the chair.
We got another, another chair there else
just, just to give it some shape.
So there's no, I, I know how well departments,
so perhaps we start off with, um,
Ms. Patton, is that yourself?
Myself? Uh, Kira, thanks
for the opportunity to come and talk to you.
So my name is Suski Pat, I'm the manager
of the ethics team at the Ministry of Health. Is
That e that's ecat, is it?
No, I look after the ecat.
You're not e implement committee?
I, my team looks after the secretariat of ecat. Right, okay.
So we kind of manage the operational side of,
uh, legislation.
I was wondering about how that Yeah. Uh,
and with
me, with me, I have Kate, Rick B
and Ben Clayton,
and they are part of the regulatory policy team at the
Ministry of Health and my Justice colleagues.
Good. I'm Jenny Marchman from the Policy Group at Justice.
Alright, well look, and thanks for joining.
So, so we'll get you to start anyway. Sure.
Anyway, um, Ms. Patton and then we'll
Great, thank you.
I mean, I think firstly I would like
to acknowledge Ms. Chapman as well and your son
and just to acknowledge the difficulties you've had
and your negative experience
and just to say we acknowledge your concerns with Sister.
Um, and so I I'll just quickly run through Yeah.
As of has done a summary of our submissions.
Very good paper too, I might say. Yeah. Great.
Um, so, um, firstly, as you know, the petition relates
to the Human Assisted Reproductive Technology Act.
The Heart Act as we call it, um,
which sets up the ethics committees that sit in my team.
The ACT is administered by justice,
and so Justice is responsible for the drafting
and the changing of the act,
but the operation largely sits with the Ministry
of Health in terms of supporting the ethics teams.
Um, as we've already discussed,
section 10 sets the maximum storage period of 10 years.
Uh, the 10 years can be extended
by application to the ethics committee.
So my team manages that application process.
Um, there's no limit to the extension length
that Arch can give on those applications,
and there's no limit to the number of times.
So sometimes we have applicants coming back for multiple,
uh, extensions and
The extensions are always 10 years or they negotiate
No. So they're, they're at
the discretion of, and,
and usually they're dependent on the nature of the, um,
so when the person, uh,
requests an extension, they'll give a reason.
So it might be to extent, so in, in the case
where it's younger people, it's usually
to extend fertility window.
Um, and in fact that's the majority
of the reason sometimes they heard before.
People are, uh, it's a difficult decision
for people to make sometimes.
Um, also people are considering things like donation,
they want more time to considering things
like embryo donation.
So there can be a raft of reasons.
Um, generally as the previous submitters, uh, suggested
acat, the majority of extensions are granted,
the only examples I can think of are the one alluded to
by acat, which is where, um, you might have an embryo
and you need consent from both parties
and there's been a, a breakup and a dispute.
So that that's where it becomes more challenging.
Um, those kind of scenarios where one party wants to extend,
the other party doesn't wanna extend.
So we have a, a couple of cases like that that would only
Be a fertilized egg.
Yes. So that would only be in the case of an embryo.
So, so generally speaking,
but specifically in the case of, of younger patients, I, I,
I, I like fertility, so I just can't think of a time
where ECAP wouldn't extend on that basis.
So generally it's, uh, their challenges
of when they're at anything outside of their guidelines
or outside of the law, they can't, can't make a decision on,
um, or anything where there isn't informed consent like the,
so the guidelines set out, so aart who, Deborah Cheers,
they set the guidelines for what's required.
And so things like informed consent are very key, uh,
for making that for ECAT to make that decision.
Um, just think
what else I need to cover.
Um, I guess the only other thing is, is, um,
submitters raise the operational process.
So my team currently we are working
with Fertility Associates
and the other two clinics
to just make sure the processes work a bit better
and are a bit more accessible.
So currently we have had a few issues with people navigating
who are, what their clinic's doing.
And so we are, we do have a process to, I guess streamline
and work with the clinics.
Um, and just to acknowledge the, the challenge
that clinics have as well in getting hold of people just
as the rest of the health sector does.
I mean there is a sort of best endeavors, um, uh,
best efforts kind of approach needed here
because it is a challenging to acknowledge
to the Associates challenge of having 14,000 people, some
of which you don't have the right address.
Um, I, I think that's where I'll stop
and I can come back to some of your questions.
So just to not the last question.
So the funding comes from Vote Health, health New Zealand,
um, and the resident health reform.
So Health New Zealand now, uh, um, uh, um,
just out the funding but also makes the policy decisions on
changes to the funding, current funding arrangements.
Um, so they make the funding decisions
and none of those rest with the Ministry of Health.
Right. Yeah. So happy to answer
and sorry I haven't remembered all your pre
previous questions, but happy to answer. Oh, alright.
Um, perhaps we just go to Minister Justice too
and just, just anything you want to add
and then we've probably combine our questions. Yeah,
Thank You. Um,
so thank you for the invitation to speak
and I would also like to acknowledge the experience that,
um, Ms. Chapman
and her family have had with the current law.
Um, I will, um, seek to supplement
what you've heard from health
and other, um, submitters as far
as possible in trying to avoid duplication.
Um, and also very happy to ask questions.
Um, so, uh, I will keep the focus on, um, the rationale
for the current law and the rights
and interests that it seeks to balance
and what we understand about the origins of it.
So as the Ministry of Health outlined the law prohibits
people from storing, um,
for more than 10 years at least they
have approval for a longer period.
And the law sets an offense, um, for storage
beyond the expiry of the storage period
and a fine of up
to $20,000 if somebody does indeed store beyond
that period. Um, sorry,
Just the finer 20,000 Of $20,000, right.
If they store beyond
The Yeah, that's right. Yeah.
Um, so the storage limit is intended
to safeguard the interest of children born from stored, um,
gametes and embryos.
Um, recognizing that longer storage periods tend to come
with heightened ethical and legal risks.
So in particular, um, it can increase the potential
for siblings to be born generations apart
and the possibility
that a genetic parent is no longer alive at a child's birth,
um, the longest storage period can also affect a person's
ability to access their whakapapa and family history
and their genetic health information.
Um, and has also touched on previously, um,
it can be associated with greater chance of dispute
or uncertainty about the status of a stored, um, ga
to embryo if somebody has died
or a relationship has broken up in terms of
what we understand of the origins of the 10 year provision.
Um, so it was added to the bill in 2000, uh, sorry,
in the two thou, early two thousands when the bill was going
through the house was added during
the select committee process.
Um, we don't, unfortunately from our files have a lot
of detail about the reasons why it was, um, set at 10 years.
Um, it did seem to be influenced by overseas practice as one
of the previous submitters, um, mentioned.
Um, and, um, in terms of
what we understand about, um, uh,
the, the reason for the sort of the fixity of the,
the strictness of the rules
and, um, the limit on any opportunity
to exercise discretion under the current law, um, this seems
to be, um, aimed at, um, making the law as clear
as possible when storage is permitted and when it is not.
And that clarity is important given the consequences for
storage beyond, which is as described as criminal offense.
Um, and the reason
for setting up a criminal offense is aimed at discouraging,
um, breaches given the ethical
and legal risks that can be associated with longer periods.
Um, so that sort of concludes probably what I'll have
to say, but, um, happy to take questions as well. Uh,
Thank you very much. In
the case where the ministry, it's the Ministry
of Justice paying the bill or the Okay.
Health Health or paying the bill, sorry, I got that wrong.
Health payment storage.
So in the 10 years, obviously
the decision haven't been made that they'll pay.
Is there an audit process in the 10 years?
Is there any, um, threshold time threshold
or will it only become an issue
after the 10 year when we approach the 10
year, 10 year? Uh,
I'm gonna have to, I do not know the
answer, but I could find out for you.
So that would be a Health New Zealand
operational processes because
You ended up up paying the bill each year
that they have. I'll get a bill each year.
Actually it probably could have been in
question for fertility.
I should asked, I shoulda have asked mean, mate,
if you still quite interested
to know what the cost is actually of
Storage? I think
the cost is around,
and again, don't quote the exact thing around $400 a year,
but I, I don't know if anyone else knows, but yeah,
Around 400 a year, but that's be ballpark it
Be recently. Yeah, that's ballpark.
Yeah.
Alright. Okay. That's,
Yes, chair.
Um, with the prescription with a 10 year, um,
limit in the law, uh,
and the opportunity for an extension to be had,
is there an appeal process for situations like
and, uh, if, if the period that expired
and there is good reason, like not having received look,
this, which I think a lot
of people have experienced at some time in their life, um,
would the law not have had an opportunity
for an appeal instead of just ending with a wall?
It doesn't have a right of appeal after the 10 years.
There is no Right. Not after this 10 years and six months.
I would say though, too, to Fertility Associates point,
the reason that the,
the legislation has a a six month window is
that they can organize to destroy and batches.
So the issue with flexibility for the clinics is then
the risk is someone comes in
and says, I'd like to extend please.
And they say, oops, we destroyed them the batch yesterday.
That's right. So I think from a clinic's perspective, it's,
it's balancing the need for them to have certainty
that if they take an action, um, you know,
which they take very seriously, obviously they, they, um,
they need some certainty.
So, so I think that the issue
for them would be the flexibility then means they're in a
flexible schedule about whether they need to destroy or not,
and then they buffer up against their risk of a a,
a illegal fine.
Yes. So it is a very challenging space. Mm-hmm. Um, yeah.
Typical one, I know because it's a policy issue,
but you would, that there needs to be a, there needs
to be at some sort of a time limit.
You couldn't, whatever, however the legislation
or the regulations aside, would you agree
that there will always have to be a threshold somewhere?
I I think we haven't done the policy work probably hard.
So I guess what I'm saying is that the,
the interests we're bailing up
that weighing up is the interests of the clinic.
Yeah. Um, having certainty, um,
because the, the, um, obligation is on them actually.
So they're the ones that are carrying the legal
responsibility, not time to take an activity
beyond a certain point in time.
Mm-hmm. And so I, I guess it's just
the weighing up of those two.
We haven't done the work to, um,
work out the best way forward,
but just to acknowledge it's not, uh,
it's not a simple, uh, clear cut
Because you're the secretary at
Yeah. So my team
looks after the secretary at free,
So Presumably they do the policy work for,
Um, so, uh, it's a little bit mixed.
So there's the two next to me
are on the regulatory policy team.
So if there were gonna be policy changes that would sit
with them, but actually the ultimate changing
of the law would sit with justice and justice as minister.
Yes. So, um, within my end that is changing the,
the operational processes that runs
and working with the clinics to make sure
between us we're working as well as we can together
to make sure nothing's falling, falling
through the cracks in terms of the application process
between them and us. Yeah,
Because I, sorry.
No, you go. No, I just want to thank you very much.
You can see a consistent thread coming through all
of the presentations.
So just that filling out just one part of one,
one gap from understanding.
So the current, uh, what, uh, what is, what is the, um,
in current entitlement, uh, for where people are at.
Um, so in the case of, um, your grandson, he
is, he's 10 years
because he is under a certain age,
Sorry for everyone, the limit is 10 years regardless of
what age The Right. Sorry. So, and, and it's,
Sorry, I mean, so when I said limit, sorry, I, I, my,
my mind's gone to the funding.
I'm just trying to look here. So, so what's the,
what's the funding situation current?
So my understanding,
and again, I I, this is not my area, so Right.
Don't quote me on this, but the, the, the funding
and maybe, you know, the more is for the first 10 years
for the legal period, and then my understanding is it would
finish at the extension point.
However, I don't know, I'm not clear.
And just to be clear as well, a lot of people, uh,
there may be people paying privately for storage
as well at that 10 year point. So I don't have,
So Mr. Chair, that, that's probably
gonna be like,
when I look at the submitters today, I think at the end,
at the end of the day, the one area we're still gonna have a
gap in is what the, the current funding is.
And the reason I think that's very relevant is,
so we go back to Alex's presentation,
and then your line of questioning with him really is
that they, that there is the, there is the funding
that comes, comes in both, both in terms of,
well, part, yeah.
Obviously in terms of public interest,
but also in terms of potentially triggering some kind
of continued relationship.
Although who makes a decision about funding,
who makes a decision that'll be funded by the ministry?
Uh, so that, that would be Health New Zealand.
And I think what is saying at the moment,
that's made in four regions within Health New Zealand.
Right? Um,
and so assumably, uh, now
that Health New Zealand is one entity,
they might look at their funding policy as a whole
Health that's an ing
because presumably, you know, like your grandson would've
because he was going to go cancer treatment,
it would've been probably a trigger Mm.
That next thing. So it was automatic, whereas to have just
made that decision and gone directly to the, um,
to fertility associates, which
the family could have done presumably.
Yeah. Um, but, but, and,
and funded it themselves, that would've been the
Difference. And, and just to
be clear that the extension
for ECAT can be requested at any point, so Yeah, yeah.
Once you've stored, you can any point put an application
into ECAT to extend that storage.
ECAT can then grant an application
and normally people will request a time period E
and then grant that, and again, they can also grant a period
and then the person can come back
and say, actually that wasn't long
enough. Can I have another extent?
And if you, sorry, and if you get an
extension, you then start paying.
Um, it, I can't answer that. Yeah.
So that's so, so, so I, I think, um, the legislation
and the funding aren't linked.
So the way the legislation works in fertility clinics work,
there's a user pays element and,
and publicly funded criteria.
Yeah. For different part, and I have no sort
of the publicly funded criteria,
but how New Zealand is responsible for deciding who,
who gets public funding and on what basis.
And this is for storage as well as, um,
IB assisted human reduction procedures.
The law operates, um, agnostically of funding
and basically, um, as often, I mean, I assume the majority
of the 14,000 literacy associates has is probably
user pays rather than government funded.
Mm-hmm. But I don't have the figures.
Okay. Oh, useful.
That's very useful. Thank you.
So who would we, um, speak to about, under, about,
about filling out that gap in our, in our research?
Um, we, we can get you come back to you with a name.
I have a name, but I have to acknowledge
that Health New Zealand is going through a bit of change.
Okay. Yes. And the people we have
contacts with there do change.
So I, I can, um, make sure that the committee gets the name
of the Health New Zealand contact. This
Is great. Thank you.
But getting, just finally, I mean,
given now this has been a really, well, such a,
such a great case that we are talking about, um, is that
ultimately the notification is going to be and,
and informed, and this wouldn't have been a problem if
that notification had arrived a year out.
Um, and, and that's would appear to me to be the remedy
to this with the, I mean, I, I'll,
and we, we'll be here to discuss this,
but one thing the committee will be discussing is whether we
think there still needs to be a threshold time where, um,
with the be 10 years or whatever,
but certainly that what needs what's come out of this is
that the notification didn't arrive.
Um, it's gonna be relatively easy where you're paying,
'cause you're paying, so you're gonna have an
email and thing.
Mm-hmm. But when the ministry's paying, that's probably
where the, which is the, this is the cases like this
where the, and where the ministry's paying it, probably
where the breakdown has come.
Yeah. Or well look members, we have no other questions.
This is again, thank you very much. Thank you.
And if you can undertake to get back to us Yes.
I'll around who the, the what we, where,
who we talked to about the funding.
Yes. I'll part of the whole thing. Thank you.
And the rural New Zealand College obstetricians
and Gynecologists, are they presumably on Zoom?
Yes.
Uh, Kira Patto, Uh, Ms. Qua. Thank you.
Uh, so my name is Professor Qua,
Professor Cindy Qua.
I'm the Dean of research and policy at, uh, resco.
I'm a professor of obstetrics
and gynecology at the University of Auckland,
and I work clinically
as the clinical director at Fertility Plus at Auckland Tuma,
the public, uh, fertility clinic.
Um, uh, that, well the only one, uh, in, at
or a facility.
So I'm representing Te Kahu, Oranga Nuku,
the New Zealand branch of Rands Cog today.
Um, I'd like to also acknowledge the submission
of Anne Chapman and, um, the strength of a personal story.
Um, so helpful
and it's great to see, uh, people talking
around the table about it.
So, um, so Kiara, to, to Anne and to whanau.
Um, look, a lot of what I have
prepared I think has been covered
and perhaps I should, um, uh, I don't want to be repetitive.
Um, uh, and I think the conversation's been very helpful.
Uh, perhaps if with your permission, I'll just go to, uh,
specific recommendations perhaps, um, which,
and I'm happy to answer some questions.
So, um, uh,
rands Cog would, uh, support a recommendation
to increase the maximum statutory time for storage, uh,
perhaps for all
or perhaps to implement a process to extend storage
for special provisions, such as for,
for fertility preservation.
So the majority of fertility preservation is
for younger people under, well, actually under 35,
but many of them, um, under, um, in that, uh,
teenage adolescent, um, age group.
And, um, we want to preserve their fertility prior to,
um, you know, potentially, um,
sterilizing medical treatments, both chemotherapy
and, um, radiotherapy and, and surgery.
So, um, you know, they, they're a a a,
a special group that we recognize in our services,
and it might be possible that you might want
to consider them as a special case.
Um, or you may, um, want
to consider a a a maximums time limit.
Uh, for, for everybody that's, that's extended.
Um, we have, we, we'd like to just acknowledge
that there are some ethical concision con considerations
with extended storage,
and some of them have been mis mentioned
and in particular the intergenerational effects.
So you could have the scenario of people having ena uh,
siblings being born in different generations.
Uh, somebody may have children, um, develop cancer, decide
to have fertility preservation, and then 20
or 30 years later they could actually use their gametes
to have another child.
So you want perhaps those, uh,
ethical concerns you might have that siblings may not be
happy with that arrangement or, uh,
and needs some discussion.
The other is the, the posthumous, um, reproduction
that people do sign when they sign, uh, to store
sperm and eggs and gats.
They can decide to donate this, um, their gat
and embryos after their death.
So, um, there is that, that issue to be cons, uh,
considered if you're going to extend the limits and,
and how that might look.
So that's the, perhaps the policy piece that,
that would take some, some thinking about.
And then when it comes to practical implement, uh,
implementation, um, the, the, the, it is a challenge
and I'm really ha happy to hear about, um,
the discussion about contacting people.
And, um, this is our clinics experience.
We, um, uh, we've recently had to increase the number
of storage tanks.
We actually store about 6,000 embryos, um,
going slightly off from the college at this moment.
And there is a cost with the, um, administration as well.
And, um, we charge, um, at Fertility Plus,
so we charge $275 a year
and it is not covered by the public contract except for
the fertility preservation.
So keeping in contact with people is,
has been a challenge for us as well.
And, um, uh, uh, uh, postal
has not been successful and probably emails
and phone phone numbers are, um,
more stable than people's addresses.
Would you believe people in this age group move a lot?
Um, so it's, it has, it has been a challenge.
So, um, I think to summarize, we support amending the act
to be more flexible, um, that we would want
to benefit young people in particular having fertility
preservation, that's the term we use.
Um, it's about reproductive choice and equity.
And uh, thank you.
I, you said, oh, thank you very much.
Um, you said we store who? Who's we?
Oh, fertility. I said at the beginning I worked clinically
as the clinical director for fertility plus the public.
We store 6,000. Right. Uh, as well.
And it is, um, it would be, uh, it,
it would be challenging if there was a blanket rule
that's like as there is in the UK to for 55 years,
that would be, that would be a lot
of storage tanks taking up, um, a lot of space.
So I think there's something somewhere in between, uh,
you know, especially for the scenario of the younger people
who are storing sperm. Yeah.
So in the UK it's a limit of 55 years? Yes.
Is that, that's the only limit.
And can I say the follow up question to that?
Do you know, uh, how that is funded in the uk?
Uh, no I don't. Um, I suspect it's not funded actually
because majority, uh, uh,
fertility treatments in the UK are generally, um, funded
by postcode as they say.
Uh, just depends where you live.
So, um, I doubt that they're funded and,
and that was just something to correct.
Um, sorry to the last speaker,
but um, uh,
the public funding is for storage is
for the fertility preservation, um, the people having
that service, not for the general IVF.
So all of our public patients are paying
every and every year.
And it is a good point to a good point that somebody's made
that as they get that invoice, they also get
that reminder, the storage. Hmm. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
Alright. Fascinating. Thank you very much.
This is, um, no other questions. Members.
Well, look, thank you very much, uh, professor
and, um, you've certainly, I think was, um,
you've been in a good position to sum up a lot of our, uh,
a lot of our, um, questions.
So thanks very much. Alright, well look
that completes now our public, um, submissions.
Uh, we'll now go into private and discuss our auctions
and where to and, uh, um, and the report
and a good discussion about what report
and what recommendations we'll put in a report.
But once again, thank you for that
and thank you on behalf of your, um, grandson, um, to say,
um, everyone should have grandmother,
uh, like, like yourself.
I don't know whether you think it's lucky to have in my home
or not, he'll change his mind through his life probably.
Thank you very much. Thank you very much.
Alright, and thank you very much, um,
for our hardworking public
servants and thank you for what you do.
Appreciate it. Thank you.